[DOCS] Documents trained model auto-scaling (#2795)
elastic/stack-docs: docs/en/stack/ml/nlp/ml-nlp-autoscaling.asciidoc

When adaptive resources are enabled, the number of vCPUs that the model deployment uses is set automatically based on the current load.
When the load is high, the number of vCPUs that the process can use is automatically increased.
When the load is low, the number of vCPUs that the process can use is automatically decreased.

You can choose from three levels of resource usage for your trained model deployment.
Refer to the tables in the <<auto-scaling-matrix>> section to find out the setings for the level you selected.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/ml-nlp-deployment-id-elser-v2.png["ELSER deployment with adaptive resources enabled.",width=640]

[discrete]
[[auto-scaling-matrix]]
== Model deployment resource matrix

The used resources for trained model deployments depends on three factors:

* your cluster environment (Serverless, Cloud, or on-prem)
* the use case you optimize the model deployment (ingest or search)
* whether adaptive resources are enabled or disabled (dynamic or static resources)

The following tables show you the exact number of allocations, threads, and vCPUs available in the different scenarios.

[discrete]
=== Deployments in Cloud optimized for ingest

> 

Author: For ingest, we try to maximize number of allocations.

[discrete]
==== Adaptive resources enabled

[cols="4*", options="header"]
|==========
| Level  | Allocations                                  | Threads | vCPUs
| Low    | 0 to 2 dynamically                           | 1       | 0 to 2 dynamically 
| Medium | 1 to 32 dynamically                          | 1       | 1 to the smaller of 32 or the limit set in the Cloud console, dynamically
| High   | 1 to limit set by Cloud console, dynamically | 1       | 1 to limit set by Cloud console, dynamically
|==========

[discrete]
==== Adaptive resources disabled

[cols="4*", options="header"]
|==========
| Level  | Allocations                                              | Threads | vCPUs
| Low    | 2 if available, otherwise 1, statically                  | 1       | 2 if available
| Medium | 32 if available, otherwise maximum available, statically | 1       | 32 if available
| High   | Maximum available set by Cloud console, statically       | 1       | Maximum available set by Cloud console, statically
|==========

[discrete]
=== Deployments in Cloud optimized for search

> 

Author: For search, we try to maximize the number of threads.

When the load is low, the number of vCPUs that the process can use is automatically decreased.

You can choose from three levels of resource usage for your trained model deployment.
Refer to the tables in the <<auto-scaling-matrix>> section to find out the setings for the level you selected.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/ml-nlp-deployment-id-elser-v2.png["ELSER deployment with adaptive resources enabled."]

[discrete]
[[auto-scaling-matrix]]
== Model deployment resource matrix

The used resources for trained model deployments depends on three factors:

* your cluster environment (Serverless, Cloud, or on-prem)
* the use case you optimize the model deployment (ingest or search)
* whether adaptive resources are enabled or disabled (dynamic or static resources)

The following tables show you the exact number of allocations, threads, and vCPUs available in the different scenarios.

[discrete]
=== Deployments in Cloud optimized for ingest

[discrete]
==== Adaptive resources enabled

[cols="4*", options="header"]
|==========
| Level  | Allocations                                  | Threads | vCPUs

> | Low    | 0 to 2 dynamically                           | 1       | 0 to 2 dynamically 

Author: @arisonl The docs say `1` but the latest decision was: "Zero for the Low usage level on both serverless and ESS." Please correct me if I'm wrong!

| Medium | 1 to 32 dynamically                          | 1       | 1 to the smaller of 32 or the limit set in the Cloud console, dynamically
| High   | 1 to limit set by Cloud console, dynamically | 1       | 1 to limit set by Cloud console, dynamically
|==========

[discrete]
==== Adaptive resources disabled

[cols="4*", options="header"]
|==========
| Level  | Allocations                                              | Threads | vCPUs
| Low    | 2 if available, otherwise 1, statically                  | 1       | 2 if available
| Medium | 32 if available, otherwise maximum available, statically | 1       | 32 if available
| High   | Maximum available set by Cloud console, statically       | 1       | Maximum available set by Cloud console, statically
|==========

[discrete]
=== Deployments in Cloud optimized for search

[discrete]
==== Adaptive resources enabled

[cols="4*", options="header"]
|==========
| Level  | Allocations                                  | Threads                                            | vCPUs
| Low    |  1                                           | 2                                                  | 2

> | Medium |  1 to 2 (if threads=16) dynamically          | maximum that the hardware allows (for example, 16) | 1 to 32 dynamically

Author: `1 to 2 (if threads=16)`
Should we elaborate on this condition?

[[ml-nlp-auto-scale]]

> = Trained model autoscaling

Reviewer: Who coined this term "trained model autoscaling". Haven't seen that one before.

I think I've lost track of how many names this features has...

You can enable autoscaling for each of your trained model deployments.
Autoscaling allows {es} to automatically adjust the resources the deployment can use based on the workload demand.

There are two ways to enable autoscaling:

* trough APIs by enabling adaptive allocations
* in {kib} by enabling adaptive resources

> IMPORTANT: You must enable {cloud}/ec-autoscaling.html[deployment autoscaling] to use model autoscaling.

Reviewer: This is not entirely true. You can just allocate one ML node and use adaptive allocations. Adaptive allocations will allocate more or less of the ML node depending on the load. However, if adaptive allocations decides it needs more than the available resources (the ML node), it cannot scale to that.

Adaptive allocations certainly works better in combination with ML autoscaling.

I'd make this a (strong) recommendation, but not say that you must enable it, since that's not true.

[discrete]
[[nlp-model-adaptive-allocations]]
== Enabling autoscaling through APIs - adaptive allocations

> Model allocations are independent units of work for NLP tasks.

Reviewer: Not sure about this sentence. I'd say model allocations can independently process units of work, not are units of work.

> The numbers of threads and allocations you can set manually for a model remain constant even when not all the available resources are fully used or when the load on the model requires more resources.

Reviewer: I'd say: If you set the numbers of threads and allocations manually, they remain constant (...)".

Instead of setting the number of allocations manually, you can enable adaptive allocations to set the number of allocations based on the load on the process.
This can help you to manage performance and cost more easily.
(Refer to the https://cloud.elastic.co/pricing[pricing calculator] to learn more about the possible costs.)

When adaptive allocations are enabled, the number of allocations of the model is set automatically based on the current load.
When the load is high, a new model allocation is automatically created.
When the load is low, a model allocation is automatically removed.

You can enable adaptive allocations by using:

* the Create inference endpoint API for {ref}/infer-service-elser.html[ELSER], {ref}/infer-service-elasticsearch.html[E5 and models uploaded through Eland] that are used as {infer} services.

> * the {ref}/start-trained-model-deployment.html[start trained model deployment] or {ref}/update-trained-model-deployment.html[update trained model deployment] APIs for trained models that are deployed on {ml} nodes.

Reviewer: Nit: "Create inference endpoint API" is written with a capital, while "start trained model deployment API" is not. please unify

You can enable adaptive resources for your models when starting or updating the model deployment.
Adaptive resources make it possible for {es} to scale up or down the available resources based on the load on the process.
This can help you to manage performance and cost more easily.
When adaptive resources are enabled, the number of vCPUs that the model deployment uses is set automatically based on the current load.
When the load is high, the number of vCPUs that the process can use is automatically increased.
When the load is low, the number of vCPUs that the process can use is automatically decreased.

You can choose from three levels of resource usage for your trained model deployment.
Refer to the tables in the <<auto-scaling-matrix>> section to find out the setings for the level you selected.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/ml-nlp-deployment-id-elser-v2.png["ELSER deployment with adaptive resources enabled.",width=640]

[discrete]
[[auto-scaling-matrix]]
== Model deployment resource matrix

The used resources for trained model deployments depends on three factors:

* your cluster environment (Serverless, Cloud, or on-premises)

> * the use case you optimize the model deployment (ingest or search)

Reviewer: the use case you optimize the model deployment **for**

* whether adaptive resources are enabled or disabled (dynamic or static resources)

> If you use {es} on-premises, adaptive resources behavior is fully dynamic and highly dependent on the hardware configuration.

Author: @darnautov Should we / can we provide any more information about this scenario?

Reviewer 2: `adaptive resources behavior is fully dynamic...` - I think we should rephrase this. vCPUs level ranges are derived based on the ml processors limits (https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/get-ml-info.html), not the adaptive resources behaviour.

The following tables show you the number of allocations, threads, and vCPUs available in Cloud when adaptive resources are enabled or disabled.

[discrete]
=== Deployments in Cloud optimized for ingest

In case of ingest-optimized deployments, we maximize the number of model allocations.

[discrete]
==== Adaptive resources enabled

[cols="4*", options="header"]
|==========
| Level  | Allocations                                  | Threads | vCPUs

> | Low    | 0 to 2 dynamically                           | 1       | 0 to 2 dynamically 

Reviewer: Almost everywhere "if available" is added, Why not here? It also applies to the small numbers.

| Medium | 1 to 32 dynamically                          | 1       | 1 to the smaller of 32 or the limit set in the Cloud console, dynamically

> | High   | 1 to limit set by Cloud console, dynamically | 1       | 1 to limit set by Cloud console, dynamically

Reviewer: by -> in the (like prev line)

Reviewer: 2x

Reviewer: also underneath

|==========

[discrete]
==== Adaptive resources disabled

[cols="4*", options="header"]
|==========
| Level  | Allocations                                              | Threads | vCPUs
| Low    | 2 if available, otherwise 1, statically                  | 1       | 2 if available

> | Medium | 32 if available, otherwise maximum available, statically | 1       | 32 if available

Reviewer: Why say here "if available", instead of the more clear "the smaller of 32 or the limit set in the Cloud console" (like above)

| High   | Maximum available set by Cloud console, statically       | 1       | Maximum available set by Cloud console, statically
|==========

[discrete]
=== Deployments in Cloud optimized for search

In case of search-optimized deployments, we maximize the number of threads.
The maximum number of threads that can be claimed depends on the hardware your architecture has.

[discrete]
==== Adaptive resources enabled

[cols="4*", options="header"]
|==========
| Level  | Allocations                                  | Threads                                            | vCPUs
| Low    |  1                                           | 2                                                  | 2
| Medium |  1 to 2 (if threads=16) dynamically          | maximum that the hardware allows (for example, 16) | 1 to 32 dynamically

> | High   |  1 to limit set by Cloud console, dynamically| maximum that the hardware allows (for example, 16) | 1 to limit set by Cloud console, dynamically

Reviewer: To be precise, you don't set an allocations limit in the cloud console, but a vCPU limit. The leads to an allocations limit of vCPU limit divided by the number of threads. Good luck phrasing that nicely!

You can choose from three levels of resource usage for your trained model deployment.
Refer to the tables in the <<auto-scaling-matrix>> section to find out the setings for the level you selected.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/ml-nlp-deployment-id-elser-v2.png["ELSER deployment with adaptive resources enabled.",width=640]

[discrete]
[[auto-scaling-matrix]]
== Model deployment resource matrix

The used resources for trained model deployments depends on three factors:

* your cluster environment (Serverless, Cloud, or on-premises)
* the use case you optimize the model deployment (ingest or search)
* whether adaptive resources are enabled or disabled (dynamic or static resources)

If you use {es} on-premises, adaptive resources behavior is fully dynamic and highly dependent on the hardware configuration.
The following tables show you the number of allocations, threads, and vCPUs available in Cloud when adaptive resources are enabled or disabled.

[discrete]
=== Deployments in Cloud optimized for ingest

In case of ingest-optimized deployments, we maximize the number of model allocations.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

When the load is low, a model allocation is automatically removed.

You can enable adaptive allocations by using:

* the create inference endpoint API for {ref}/infer-service-elser.html[ELSER], {ref}/infer-service-elasticsearch.html[E5 and models uploaded through Eland] that are used as {infer} services.
* the {ref}/start-trained-model-deployment.html[start trained model deployment] or {ref}/update-trained-model-deployment.html[update trained model deployment] APIs for trained models that are deployed on {ml} nodes.

If the new allocations fit on the current {ml} nodes, they are immediately started.
If more resource capacity is needed for creating new model allocations, then your {ml} node will be scaled up if {ml} autoscaling is enabled to provide enough resources for the new allocation.
The number of model allocations can be scaled down to 0.
They cannot be scaled up to more than 32 allocations, unless you explicitly set the maximum number of allocations to more.
Adaptive allocations must be set up independently for each deployment and {infer} endpoint.

[discrete]
[[optimize-use-case]]
=== Optimize for typical use cases by using adaptive allocations

> You can optimize your model deplyoment for typical use cases, such as search and ingest.

Reviewer: deplyoment

* the {ref}/start-trained-model-deployment.html[start trained model deployment] or {ref}/update-trained-model-deployment.html[update trained model deployment] APIs for trained models that are deployed on {ml} nodes.

If the new allocations fit on the current {ml} nodes, they are immediately started.
If more resource capacity is needed for creating new model allocations, then your {ml} node will be scaled up if {ml} autoscaling is enabled to provide enough resources for the new allocation.
The number of model allocations can be scaled down to 0.
They cannot be scaled up to more than 32 allocations, unless you explicitly set the maximum number of allocations to more.
Adaptive allocations must be set up independently for each deployment and {infer} endpoint.

[discrete]
[[optimize-use-case]]
=== Optimizing for typical use cases

You can optimize your model deployment for typical use cases, such as search and ingest.
When you optimize for ingest, the throughput will be higher, which increases the number of {infer} requests that can be performed in parallel.
When you optimize for search, the latency will be lower during search processes.

> * If you want to optimize for ingest, set the number of threads to `1` (`"num_threads": 1`).

Reviewer 2: this param is called differently in `trained_model` API, cc @jan-elastic 
```suggestion
* If you want to optimize for ingest, set the number of threads to `1` (`"thread_per_allocation": 1`).
```

[discrete]
[[nlp-model-adaptive-resources]]
== Enabling autoscaling in {kib} - adaptive resources

You can enable adaptive resources for your models when starting or updating the model deployment.
Adaptive resources make it possible for {es} to scale up or down the available resources based on the load on the process.
This can help you to manage performance and cost more easily.
When adaptive resources are enabled, the number of vCPUs that the model deployment uses is set automatically based on the current load.
When the load is high, the number of vCPUs that the process can use is automatically increased.
When the load is low, the number of vCPUs that the process can use is automatically decreased.

You can choose from three levels of resource usage for your trained model deployment.
Refer to the tables in the <<auto-scaling-matrix>> section to find out the setings for the level you selected.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/ml-nlp-deployment-id-elser-v2.png["ELSER deployment with adaptive resources enabled.",width=640]

[discrete]
[[auto-scaling-matrix]]
== Model deployment resource matrix

The used resources for trained model deployments depend on three factors:

> * your cluster environment (Serverless, Cloud, or on-premises)

Reviewer 2: Should we mention that for serverless Obs and Security projects adaptive resources are enabled at all times and we do not show the control in Kibana?
